the rags to riches story is a classic
narrative Trope that has captured the
hearts of audiences for Generations one
of the most enduring and popular
variations of this tale is the story of
a nobody becoming a star
this narrative has been a staple of
Hollywood movies for almost a century
and it continues to resonate with
audiences to this very day the earliest
examples of this story in cinema can be
traced back to the silent film era in
1927 Warner Brothers released The Jazz
Singer about a young man who defies his
family's wishes and pursues a career in
Show Business the film was a box office
sensation and marked the emergence of
sound in Hollywood movies throughout the
1930s and 40s Hollywood produced a
string of films that featured the rags
to riches narrative perhaps the most
famous of these is a star is born which
was first released in 1937 and has been
remade multiple times since then
starring the likes of Janet Gaynor Judy
Garland Barbra Streisand and Lady Gaga
as Hollywood left the studio era behind
in the 1970s we saw a shift towards
gritty realistic dramas but the rags to
Rich's narrative continued to be popular
one notable example was the rocky series
the films tell the story of Rocky Balboa
a struggling boxer from Philadelphia who
gets a shot at the heavyweight
championship
through hard work and determination
Rocky becomes a hero to millions in the
1980s and 1990s Hollywood began to
produce more movies that focused on
individual achievement and the American
dream with movies like 1983's Flash
Dance about a young woman who dreams of
becoming a professional dancer and 1990s
pretty woman about a sex worker who's
hired by a wealthy businessman who then
Falls madly in love with her rags to
Rich's storylines are important to
people because they provide a message of
Hope and inspiration
emphasize the value of hard work and
resilience and offer a form of escapism
from the challenges of everyday life by
depicting the Journey of a character who
starts from humble beginnings and
achieves great success
these stories tap into some of the most
fundamental desires and aspirations that
people have and provide a powerful
reminder that anything is possible with
the right mindset and the right amount
of effort and that's why we're going to
explore the epitome of Rags to Riches
American Dream filmmaking today
with show Girls
the first a word from our sponsor
hellofresh are you sick of eating
nothing but junk food in the occasional
can of doggy Chow do you find cooking
meals for yourself to be simply too
overwhelming
well hellofresh's pre-proportioned
ingredients make it easy and cut down on
your food waste by at least 23 percent
compared to grocery shopping helping
your wallet and the planet which is good
because on average hello fresh meals
have a 31 lower carbon footprint than
the same meals made from Supermarket
ingredients and no worries if you're not
a pro in the kitchen I'm certainly not
so hellofresh's foolproof recipes and
pre-proportioned easy to prepare meals
have saved me from becoming one of those
guys who just orders in every night it's
also been a lifesaver ever since my
doctor put me on a borderline ketogenic
diet because hellofresh has options to
cover a range of dietary plans low carb
low calorie and vegetarian they even
have meals that are best for big
families and special meals available
that let you expand your palette by
checking out food from across the globe
and now is a great time to sign up for
hellofresh because you can save a bunch
just go to hellofresh.com and use the
code James s50 for 50 off plus your
first box ships for free yeah fifty
percent off just by using the code James
s50 that's
j-a-m-e-s-s-50 at hellofresh.com
I was kind of shocked by the discount
I'm not gonna lie so put down that can
of doggy chow and start eating like a
goddess today
[Music]
thank you
foreign
[Music]
thank you lights
other lights
there we go good evening girls and Bros
and non-binary hoes and welcome to the
main room of the Stardust Hotel and
Casino my name is James and I'll be your
MC for this evening of sexy
scintillating ladies and Macho super
jocks but
before we get to tonight's entertainment
I'd like to talk to you about these guys
and gals in some detail
so that you know what kind of a show
you're in for
starting with the famous ladies of the
infamous film
Showgirls make no mistake Showgirls is
many people's favorite movie there are
entire conventions dedicated to it with
drag queens donning their feather boas
and throwing on Southern Accents and
flashing out tasseled nipples at the
slightest provocation regardless of the
fact that there are not in fact any
tasseled nipples in Showgirls following
the movie's release in box office bomb
The Producers managed to turn a profit
off of the cult fan base via home video
Collector's Editions midnight screenings
touring the cast for autographs and
selling related merchandise the movie
since it went to video and DVD has more
than turned a profit and is now fondly
compared to the worst of the worst bad
movies like the room and troll 2.
but with boobies when most people say
they like show Girls they're usually
quick to say that they like it
ironically there are some people who do
earnestly think that it's a good story
with amazing performances but we're not
going to talk about them there's also
usually gay people in the mix who adore
the amount of intended and unintended
camp that exists in this film but most
have again an ironic love of Showgirls
they're drawn to the absurdism of it
they watch it and they see a complete
failure of Direction in every way they
see Elizabeth Berkeley doing whatever it
is that she's doing they see a gruesome
carnivalesque car accident of everything
in a movie that could go wrong
going worse they see a failure to meet
basic expectations so dire that you
can't look away
for these reasons we love show Girls we
are drawn to this movie because of all
these terrible elements it's hilarious
to see such an egregious failure and
make no mistake showgirls
is bad
like it's awful the acting ranges from
nuanced to unhinged and in Gina
gershon's case she dances on a thin line
between the two of them the plot is
Loosely strung together composed of
essentially every single Trope found in
A Star is Born movies everything is
bombastic and dialed up to an 11 for the
entire film there is no point of slowing
down however
in Vegas at a roulette table winning off
of a hundred Reds in a row is just as
improbable as losing to Black a hundred
times
but this movie pulls it off somehow
hitting so many perfectly bombastic
overuse boring and only in the movies
plot tropes in perfect sequence can't
just be a matter of some of the most
competent and celebrated filmmakers of
the time
turning a blind eye to all of the other
ridiculous things that for some reason
landed on the screen
surely
someone in a suit and
Ty would have looked at some of the
pre-production rehearsals and said
you know what maybe Paula Abdul can't
dance even outside of how many people
will behind the camera were seasoned
Hollywood veterans after watching the
movie itself enough times you begin to
pick up on little patterns there's
something about Showgirls that other bad
movies just don't seem to have troll to
the room and any number of Camp horror
movies they tend to run out of steam
about halfway to two-thirds in they're
just not fun to watch anymore they draw
from a certain number of tricks and
sensibilities and after a while the
audience gets diminishing returns okay
cool Tommy Wiseau is doing Tommy Wiseau
things just like he did those same
things earlier in the movie it's
actually incredibly difficult to
deliberately create bad movies the
examples we Elevate are accidents the
room was intended to be a brilliant
Masterpiece with a Madman with too much
money at the helm Troll 2 was just uh
a lot
a lot of confusion because
movies that try to be bad by parodying
tropes in a genre usually run into the
aforementioned problem where they run
out of material before they've hit their
feature length or they become
predictable they conform to their own
format a little too insecure to keep
finding ways to flip the script it's why
Monty Python movies still hold up
comedically The Comedy troupe finds ways
to keep you guessing until the very end
they just keep throwing things at you
you never have time to pay attention to
something that's not funny on the flip
side there is an abundance of movies
that are
technically
perfect and I mean that from a technical
standpoint they are perfect the
cinematography gives depth the editing
is tight they've got A-list actors
giving the performances of their lives
the script is dripping with pathos
but for some reason they're just not
engaging and you can watch Modern
Spielberg with rose tinted glasses and
you can find a great movie in there if
you want but it doesn't capture the je
ne sais quoi elements of how he just
stopped making movies that are
interesting to watch the difficult thing
when debating lifelong Spielberg fans is
that their idea of his modern works are
so colored by his early career that they
ignore the non-qualifiable elements of
is this movie engaging because engaging
isn't really anything that you can
reduce to a matter of technique or a
checklist of must-haves whether
something is engaging or not is less a
matter of technique and more a matter of
artistic taste
which is something that cannot be
learned but can be fostered and can be
lost the showgirls
show Girls is definitely engaging if
nothing else and unlike a slew of other
Star Wars Christmas specials there's
never really that point in Showgirls
where it stops giving something new to
the next scene it's closer in
sensibilities to Rocky Horror which
spits everything at you at such a
dizzying pace that you don't even
realize that the cast retires for the
night has some sex and after Susan
Sarandon distracts us with an acid trip
sex scene for some reason we are
gathered at a dinner table having like a
four course dinner what's the matter
Columbia it's not like you've never had
meatloaf before but the argument here
isn't that Showgirls is ironically
fantastic I honestly have come to the
belief the Showgirls is unironically
a masterpiece of Cinema specifically
because it's intended to be a showcase
of Badness but in order to distinguish
what I mean by an ironic appreciation of
Showgirls we really need to sit down and
talk about irony itself
because in this post-jagged little pill
Alanis Morissette world we live in irony
has become one of the most overused and
misunderstood words in all of the
English language
[Music]
many people who say that something is
ironic probably are referring to
something that is coincidental or
something that seems vaguely literary as
it happens in real life this leads
people to believe that irony has a fluid
and interchangeable meaning which
results in the word being thrown into
random sentences to sound academic like
an undergraduate who has to fill out a
word count or a right-wing talk show or
podcast host clearly though irony has an
incredibly specific set of uses vaguely
when something is ironic it means what
happens occurs in spite of the events
that were meant to lead to it an example
of something ironic is actually a 1996
indie rock song deliberately outlining
the number of fake ironies and then
becoming so popular that it causes a
shift in the cultural awareness of irony
while fans of the song are entirely
unaware that a song called ironic does
not contain any actual ironies Alanis
Morissette's song actually outlines a
number of coincidences isn't it ironic
that a song called ironic does not
contain anything ironic the difference
between irony and a coincidence is that
a coincidence describes two instances
which occur in spite of each other an
irony to describes a single outcome that
subverts preceding events or information
irony cannot be coincidental as a matter
of fact because the outcome happens
specifically because of an effort taken
to ensure it would not happen in order
for more sets line it's like rain on
your wedding day to be ironic you would
have needed to plan your wedding in a
part of the world with almost no
precipitation in a time of the year
where precipitation is additionally
uncommon only for it to rain anyway
while your hometown of Seattle
Washington has a solid week of sunshine
but this is only one kind of irony there
are actually three different specific
ways that irony can exist the first as
demonstrated and most commonly misused
is situational irony raining every day
on your vacation only for the sun to
shine the day that you leave is classic
but this symbolism and foreshadowing are
some of the oldest literary devices in
history one of the greatest ironies in
all of literature is Sophocles Oedipus
tyrannus which many people know is the
story of a guy who kills his dad to [ __ ]
his mom popularized by by the
pseudo-scientific and Incredibly skewed
research of Sigmund Freud Sophocles told
the story of Oedipus who in an
unnecessarily complicated Cascade of
time jumps and people stepping on stage
and saying but wait you don't know the
whole story Oedipus is the prince of
Corinth who once asked the Oracle of
Delphi who his birth parents were she
replied that he would kill his father
and marry his mother obviously put off
by this thereafter he vows to never
return to Corinth so he would not kill
his father so he decides to travel to
Thebes and gets in an argument with an
anonymous wealthy man at a Crossroads a
fight breaks out and Oedipus kills the
other man he then instead marries
jocosta the recently widowed queen of
Thieves which
seriously this is the guy who solved the
riddle of the Sphinx and he can't figure
out what happened to the recently
murdered King of Thieves or that maybe
if you're prophesied to sleep with your
mother maybe avoid older women in
general and the way we get around this
plot hole is by Oedipus withholding
information from the audience until the
third act I don't know
sounds like it needs to get workshopped
a bit in spite of oedipus's inability to
put two and two together we learned that
he was adopted by the royal family of
Corinth and was actually born to jocosta
in Thebes and the man he killed at the
crossroads which he was only traveling
specifically because he was trying to
escape his fate was actually his father
the irony here is that oedipus's
decision to avoid his fate is what led
him to do exactly what the Oracle said
he would do
the additional layer of situational
irony is that Freud named his Oedipus
complex to describe a boy who wants to
remove his father and sleep with his
mother when the point of Oedipus is how
desperately he didn't want to do this he
wasn't weird meanwhile why does nobody
give the Oracle of Delphi the credit she
deserves [ __ ] given 10th dimensional
Chess Championship semi-finalists here
next year average anime teenage villain
so yeah that was situational irony
events influence and outcome though the
outcome subverts the expectations the
next most well-known instance of irony
is dramatic irony dramatic irony is
typically used in theater or more
recently visual mediums like film and
television this is where the audience is
made aware of how the story is going to
end before the Story begins which
Oedipus tyrannus is another example of
but this isn't to be confused with
foreshadowing where within the
literature itself there is an indication
of what is to come foreshadowing occurs
in a way where the characters
hypothetically could be be made aware of
future events with varying degrees of
subtlety this doesn't always need to be
a narrative prologue which directly
tells the audience what's going to
happen dramatic irony to use another
Shakespearean example for which all of
our high school teachers drilled into US
is Romeo and Juliet which not only is
probably one of his worst plays but
evidenced by the fact that he thought so
little of the play's contents that he
opened it up with a prologue that
literally tells the audience that they
can leave if they want without missing
much gone are the days when people watch
TV and movies to actually watch them
instead of just the one-time instant
gratification serotonin Rush of gasping
at the obvious interchangeable plot
twists that you've seen in 20 other
movies back in my day we used to have
more reasons to watch movies than just
to be surprised for two minutes no
seriously spoiler culture has destroyed
the use of dramatic irony you get people
these days who refuse to watch movie
trailers because they spoil the story
let alone that the plot is only one
component of any dramatic media the
audience goes into the play aware that
both Romeo and Juliet die
before they even meet them likely
because the first three acts are just so
Piney that he needed some indication to
let the audience know that it wasn't
just romantic drivel it was romantic
drivel with double suicide it was
entirely constructed to project the
message that young love is dumb how
ironic is it that we consider it a great
love story today dramatic irony doesn't
need to be literary either James
Cameron's Titanic is dramatically ironic
because you literally walked into the
theater knowing the ship's gonna sink
you know what's going to happen
the characters do not the third type of
irony and one we don't usually
acknowledge is irony is a verbal irony
or more popularly known as satire this
is where the phrasing in syntax used in
a work do not align with the actual
intentions of the author through the use
of other literary devices often the
carnivalesque or exaggeration the
Creator's intent is made clear this is
the case with Jonathan Swift's satirical
essay a modest proposal in which he
details a solution to the famine in
Ireland where the government enacts
emissive for the Irish to cannibalize
their unwanted Catholic infants this
wood he said solve three problems food
shortage overpopulation and affording
poor families a source of income by
selling their babies to meat producers
boom check check check but here's the
thing Swift himself was Irish and in the
language of English intellectual
arguments of the day he dismisses other
plausible easy solutions to famine and
poverty in Ireland
this is a satirical parody of the
political and academic justifications of
Cruelty instead he raises a claim so
absurd that it seems completely
unrealistic while highlighting the
lengths that the English Parliament will
go to instead of finding any other
feasible solution to a food shortage a
difficulty When approaching verbal irony
or satire is the non-qualifiable element
of taste as mentioned in other videos
and will be mentioned again satire has a
considerable risk of being too subtle
and thus can be read as supporting the
very thing that it intends to ridicule
in which case I have an argument to say
the Showgirls itself qualifies as verbal
irony for reasons that I fully intend on
explaining in gratuitous detail if it's
true and the entire point of Showgirls
is to make you see how bad it is then
those who love Showgirls ironically
for the entertainment value of seeing a
terrible movie
are actually appreciating Showgirls for
the exact reason it was meant to be
consumed
so if you say you love show Girls
ironically
you're actually unironically conforming
to the Cinematic experience that Paul
verhoven wanted to give to you
and to the rest of us who admire it
unironically
we're the actual ironic ones you know
because that's how irony works
satire
things aren't what you would like
expect them to be
subverted and
stuff yeah irony but it's quite a claim
to take a movie that's bad and say that
not only is it so bad that it's good but
that it's a masterpiece because it's
meant to be so bad that it can't not be
good
such a bold claim is going to require
some very bold evidence
[Music]
before we talk about Showgirls itself we
need to justify my claim about seasoned
Hollywood veterans behind the camera
because when it comes to well-respected
directors it's not uncommon that they
make a bad movie so in that case it
usually is just boring or forgettable
but if we look at Trends in Hollywood
it's actually much less likely that an
incredibly competent and well-paid team
could fail to the point of making
something that spectacularly bad then
going out of one's way to make something
that's spectacularly bad on purpose
director Paul verhoven actually is
responsible for several other films from
the pre-millennial era of Hollywood
which to this day continue to be held up
and even turned into memes specifically
I want to take a look at Basic Instinct
Robocop and Starship Troopers and while
Basic Instinct sets a
strange gold bar for murder mystery cop
dramas and is relevant to Showgirls
specifically both Robocop and Starship
Troopers established fairhoven as a
master satirist in the case of Robocop
and Troopers they ought to be used as
examples of the use of framing devices
to completely subvert the content of the
film in either instance the scripts
themselves are of very little substance
aside from intending to be mass-market
crowd-pleasing action movies however in
this process verhoven completely
subverts the written content and spoken
word of his visual cues and getting
especially specific performances from
his actors in the case of a visual cue
certain scenes or the entire film are
established One Way permitting a
sarcastic interpretation of the events
in the instance of performances an actor
May evoke certain references from their
line delivery alone this is a specially
important for Starship Troopers the plot
of Starship Troopers is nothing special
nothing you wouldn't get out of your
average Army movie originally written as
what was considered a coming-of-age
novel by Robert a Heinlein while on one
hand it was praised for its sequences of
training and combat it was very divisive
in nature heineland's very deliberate
show of support for violent military
campaigns was met with criticisms that
echoed The public's fatigue of ongoing
conflict in Vietnam that didn't seem to
have a clear goal or end point the use
of military and War in a coming-of-age
novel is also a real wholesome boys
becoming mankana story right the story
is problematic and even at the time
there were some raised eyebrows which in
conjunction with the novel's politics
about who is not worthy of being a
citizen have left a relatively tarnished
Legacy for the story heinlin himself was
inspired to write this novel when in
1958 America announced a suspension of
all nuclear arms testing he apparently
felt that America faced too much of a
threat to just be wide open like that
what if a race of semi-sentient bug
people were to attack how would America
defend itself then so he wrote a book
about it which in itself has a kind of
Clueless Ridiculousness about it on one
hand Heinlein wanted to write a book
where the American I mean I mean human
where the human way of life is under
threat of annihilation by the Menace of
sentient murderbugs on the other hand
Heinlein really wanted to depict the
kind of futuristic Utopia that he felt
mankind would only attain
through a fascist State he depicts our
leaders as unilaterally virtuous and
trustworthy furthermore the only
citizens who have a right to vote or
participate in Civic discussion are
those who have worked within the
government almost exclusively in the
military
so what happens when you give what is by
almost all accounts a proto-fascist
narrative that is so celebratory of the
military that there's a strong case to
describe it as a recruitment tool to a
Dutch director who watched the Nazis
take over his country
you get a space Nazi recruitment film
that's what you get as if the Aryan
poster boy who goes through the trials
of war and doubt to shut off the Flippin
Boyhood to become a grizzled yet
dazzlingly handsome leader among men was
not convincing enough we get Neil
Patrick Harris as a psychic officer and
an SS Overcoat verhoven seems to take
the recruitment meta text of the book
and incorporate it into the text of his
film where there are Fascist elements he
draws inspiration from Lenny Riefenstahl
but at the same time very subtly makes a
mockery of these characters and their
problems and when in doubt showcase an
absurd number of shots of these space
fascists dying in droves against these
aliens because they don't have the power
armor that they had in the book however
there is an additional layer to this
movie which is the opening and closing
sequence the I'm doing my part too is a
meme that sees frequent usage on the
internet in conjunction with the closing
sequence where the three primary
characters basically look at the camera
and say enlist today really work to
frame this entire film as enlistment
propaganda that would exist in a
universe where humanity is embroiled in
a conflict against giant murder bugs in
space and really
especially when it comes down to Johnny
every area and over here
he goes through the stages of a
Whimsical desire to serve his country
questioning and doubting his own
leadership making trauma-bonded friends
and learning the hard way how to make
tough choices it really does establish a
flattering expectation of armed services
in conjunction with his two other high
school friends who were also military
bound we are shown that there are more
ways than one to serve one's country I
mean planet the overwhelming majority of
satirical elements though are from
visual cues and performances when it
comes to the majority of Hollywood
executives
that's a little too subtle for them to
pick up on with their little business
degrees the film was marketed as a
straightforward cut and dry Sci-Fi
Action Movie trailers for the film make
no attempt to display any kind of
satirical intent this is something that
was fairly common in many verhoven films
particularly his action movies as
Billy from their depictions in the
trailers they can be sold as
straightforward action movies but have a
little bit more substance than other
films in the same genre while Starship
Troopers maybe verhoven's greatest
example of scathingly sarcastic
condemnation of his own source material
RoboCop is his best example of genre
criticism so unapparent
that it can pass for the media it's
actually trying to subvert again set in
a science fiction Universe RoboCop is
the kind of Bionic Man story that you
would expect a cop is killed in the line
of duty and after being reconstructed as
a cyborg begins to get flashes of his
old life and then goes on a Revenge
Quest against the human people who
killed him holy [ __ ] is that the dad
from That 70s Show
at a glance RoboCop seems to be your
run-of-the-mill cop movie but he's a
robot the city of Detroit is so crime
ridden that officers can regularly
expect their buddies to die in the line
of duty being an officer is more about
saying badass lines to the queer-coated
bad guys and the corporate bad guys to
whom they are secretly employed not to
be confused with the corporate good guys
who will benefit from having the icky
corporate Executives unceremoniously
removed on a level deeper
the film is about excessive police
violence officers are depicted treating
their firearms like toys and take
apparent Delight in opportunities to use
them police officers put themselves in
situations where they need to use Force
instead of say due process and
investigation when police officers die
the force uses this as justification for
requiring greater armaments leading to
the bad guys acquiring more Firepower
for themselves on a deeper level the
film speaks as a cautionary tale of the
kind of world this police state arms
race will generate spliced in between
the narrative are a number of newsreels
where anchors give a brief synopsis of
the state of the world functionally
these newsreels give the audience an
idea of how the public reacts to police
crime and the introduction of the first
cybernetic officer both Robocop and
Starship Troopers demonstrate Paul
verhoven's ability to create a narrative
which can deceive audiences and
producers into believing a film project
is one thing when it's actually another
in spite of his satirical Tendencies
verhoven does manage to pull off serious
fiction very well working on projects
that earned him a heap of Hollywood cred
namely his other titso cocaine snorting
bisexual demonizing wacky waving
inflatable tube orgasming psychological
Thriller Basic Instinct which bears and
outstanding connection
to show Girls
from what I can gather Showgirls was
intended to recreate the magic of Basic
Instinct but bigger Basic Instinct was
small in scope a psychological ROM
through sex and conflicts of interest in
the police force which was a big hit and
even though Studios may have thought it
was because the audience got a front row
view of Sharon Stone snatch iconic the
film itself was an engaging and
methodical case study in gaslighting the
audience the key here was engaging
performances from everyone involved
Beyond sharing verhoven is the director
of these films also have the same writer
Joe esterhaus being able to navigate the
twists and turns in this whodunis when
the who is abundantly clear and yet even
the audience begins to doubt themselves
takes a strong narrative Direction this
movie made an absurd amount of money
especially for a hard R rating and
surely not all of that could be credited
to the sex in order to really sell the
story to the audience everyone else
needs to be on top of their game
estherhas also wrote the script for
Flashdance which helped cement him is
Hollywood's naked lady go-to guy the
surge in popularity of high-profile
erotic Thrillers was drawing the eye of
upper level Hollywood Executives and
they wanted to take the Acclaim of Basic
Instinct and push it even further the
primary draw to Basic Instinct may have
been the strongly provocative sex scenes
but the real dramatic pull was the
chemistry between Michael Douglas and
Sharon Stone who plays Catherine tremel
is an heiress and an author involved in
a gruesome murder as the victim's
girlfriend one of her novels also
depicts the murder scene in perfect
detail right down to the ice pick she
also has other novels depicting murders
that she is linked to while it seems
that Catherine is the obvious suspect
she has everyone wrapped around her
finger through the process of seduction
even the audience questions whether she
actually did it or not we may be
inclined to wonder how a writer could go
from Basic Instinct
to show Girls however to be honest there
was a lot about Basic Instinct which
from a writing perspective would be red
flags things there seem to just happen
which are nonsensical except to fit
certain dramatic beats namely the
dramatic relationship between Douglas's
homicide detective Nick Curran and
police psychologist Dr Beth Garner after
Corrine was put under investigation for
shooting two tourists he had to undergo
therapy sessions with Garner where they
also began seeing each other
romantically even while Curran was still
her patient which is an ethical cluster
and while the film makes no attempt to
flatter the sfpd there is a certain
suspension of disbelief needed to take
this seriously especially as it's made
clear that the other officers gossip
that kurin only started dating Dr Garner
to get off the hook there are also a few
other minor plot holes or dropped beats
the kind that exists in almost every
movie that you don't pay attention to
however as I said about suspension of
disbelief the audience remains engaged
regardless because the performances of
the actors are selling you a world in
which this chain of events is possible
we can dismiss the breaches of Ethics as
a self-aware criticism of corruption in
the police force we can dismiss the
dropped beats as an additional layer of
doubt that the audience is meant to Come
Away with provided the talent in front
of the camera with the chemistry between
Stone and Douglas especially
shortcomings in the material can be
excused because you are so engaged in
what the film is doing well
that you don't notice when it's not
Landing verhoven's initial cut would
have actually gotten Basic Instinct in
NC-17 rating the release cut was about
45 seconds shorter and swapped out
different shots to obscure the explicit
elements no doubt this was at the
Studio's insistence but the seed was
planted if it was okay to make an NC-17
movie how much more could a studio get
away with showing all they needed was
one genuinely great NC-17 film to open
the floodgates
which brings us
to Showgirls there's a movie that's
creating quite a buzz in Hollywood these
days not only because of its racy
content but also because its director is
hoping it will receive the very rating
that usually means box office death
NC-17 so there was a lot riding on the
idea of the film that would become show
girls even if the script didn't exist
yet and as it so happened esterhaus
pitched the idea of a Las Vegas story
about the corruption of Fame to Paul
verhoven and wrote it down on a napkin
the idea of the duo behind Basic
Instinct collaborating on this project
was something everyone in Hollywood
wanted in on every major Studio made
bids on Esther haas's pitch resulting in
an idea that went to auction and landed
a 2 million dollar advance in the early
90s when the film went into production
he was paid another 1.7 million dollars
for the finished script MGM wanted to
recreate the magic of Basic Instinct and
they were pulling out all the stops and
so it is in spite of being surrounded by
some of the most renowned character
actors of the day that Elizabeth
Berkeley was doing this
and Elizabeth Berkeley is no Sharon
Stone with no Sharon Stone and so the
audience has no reason to take for
granted that any of the weird elements
of Showgirls are happening on purpose
instead it's all part of the hurricane
of pure chaos that occupies the majority
of screen time in Showgirls and so all
the little questions and doubts bubble
up to the surface and instead of
suspending your disbelief you openly
wonder if this is a strip club or a drag
bar is it camp
is it drama
is a cringe is it gritty is a glamor
even if Aster Hoss's script itself is
lacking it's one thing to say that
verhoven made a dog and pony show of
Badness a project he was signed on to
that had no hope of being good so he
steered the ship into hurricane Nomi in
the hopes that it would find a cult
audience so it's another thing entirely
to argue that verhoven specifically
opted for the depictions that he did to
deliberately make a mockery of the
entire genre of rising star narratives
through a lens so subtle that it was
mistaken for the trash
it was entirely meant to satirize
which provided verhoven's affinity for
satire I don't think it's out of the
realm of possibility
but Showgirls is an entirely different
Beast
so really the next question we need to
ask ourselves is
what the [ __ ] is going on in this movie
[Music]
even if it's good for being bad you
don't make something this good without
knowing what you're doing as a filmmaker
you know it's a long path from
conception to release
to be good at your job you need to know
how to identify the Stepping Stones you
should avoid they're usually wobbly with
bad writing acting or even editing you
want to stick to the solid stones to
make your job as easy as possible so
what happens if you choose to step on
all the wobbly ones on purpose before we
begin to look at Showgirls as a master
class in meta textual satire there are
cues to examine that indicate that even
if trying to make a mockery
verhoven can't help himself but use
exemplary cinematic technique
[Music]
I don't want to miscommunicate even if
it is a case study of Badness it's
intended to be a collection of the worst
possible non-qualifiable narrative
decisions Showgirls from a structural
point of view is a big hot mess first
you start with a plot that really isn't
anything special a normal girl gets
swept up into a life of Fame and stardom
by nothing but her own grit and raw
talent the quintessential American
Underdog though she learns that Life in
the Fast Lane comes with its set of
drawbacks haunted by an examination of
who she has become to succeed in this
lifestyle she steps away from the
spotlight she fought so hard to achieve
realizing that the real spotlight
where the people she met along the way
such and such Etc nonsense coupled with
several love triangles a tempestuous
love-hate rivalry and an inevitable
departure from this lifestyle this movie
is basically every other movie like it
but it's the fact that
stuffed into the plot
is every other movie like it this movie
is the most
movie that it could possibly be within
the first seven minutes there is
hitchhiking a switchblade attempted
vehicular manslaughter references to
gambling addiction vomiting attempted
suicide and eluded lesbian undertones
and the movie doesn't really slow down
from there it systematically goes around
and hits every single Mark that a
dramatic film could hit this results in
a plot that has about
two dozen things in it that don't really
need to be there it's a situation like
Tommy with sews the room where things
seem to just happen because these are
things that happen in dramatic movies so
it should go into this dramatic movie I
got the results of the test back I
definitely have breast cancer so it's
really hard to synopsisize Showgirls for
its elements of Badness because there
are many sequences that seem to be from
many different sub-genres of rising star
movies on one hand it wants to draw from
the starving artist who's persevering on
Talent alone on the other hand it's
telling a story about the exploitation
of women in entertainment it's also
telling a story about navigating the
politics of the entertainment industry
and it's telling a story about the
consequences of stardom burlesque Black
Swan Hustlers any number of the
stars-born movies they're only trying to
tell one of those stories there are also
sequences that just don't make any sense
the recurring theme of food is strange
even though she's managed to be an
incredibly successful crowd pleaser at
the Cheetah club Nomi is now relegated
to a diet of brown rice and vegetables
this
apparently culminates later on in the
film with Nomi reflecting on her life
while gazing over the Vegas strip eating
a hamburger it seems that under the
pressure she has broken from her diet to
afford herself a small pleasure which
would be very impactful if it wasn't for
the fact that
not only do we never see her ingest
brown rice and or vegetables but we do
see her eating junk food regularly
including a hamburger outside of looking
pretty this scene offers nothing to the
development of the character there's
also the weirdness in which esterhaus
has these people talking about brown
rice and vegetables like it's nutrient
paste do you like brown rice and
vegetables yeah
you do worse than dog food and food in
general I've had dog food
you have doggy Chow John I used to love
doggie Chow
I love doggy Joe
avoid this sign up for hellofresh and
especially given that the entire
top-down decision making behind the
movie was about tits I'm especially
confused about the depiction of nipples
the missiles first of all
is it normal for girls to apply lipstick
to their nipples is that a thing do
straight guys want that what what what's
going on here but primarily the display
of bear boobies is so gratuitous it
Ventures into complete desensitization
again this is a movie about topless
girls in a Las Vegas show boobs being
nothing special is probably par for the
course however this ends up being
another indication that Esther Haas
doesn't know what he's talking about
topless shows in Las Vegas to my
knowledge according to one Elvira do not
happen like this yes there were topless
shows in Vegas but nipples were covered
with pasties or tassels so that's a
thing and second the girls were rarely
exploited to this degree at least not
professionally okay show me your tits
this scene itself
is a bit wonky
because there's a huge deal made about
Nomi exposing herself like this even
though it's nothing we've already seen
at least once in the last 30 minutes the
more impactful thing to do would be to
have know me never really take off her
top in the early part of the movie even
at the strip club however because she
wants this part so badly she's willing
to begin making compromises but because
not one scene earlier we saw Nomi give
it topless gyroscopic lap dance when the
audition scene hits not only are Nomi's
boobs nothing we haven't seen before but
her reaction doesn't fit someone who has
been stripping to pay rent
since she stepped foot in Vegas
according to interviews with Vegas
showgirls the topless part of auditions
was done very impersonally the dancer
would have a topless Polaroid taken
which would be shown to the director
later the photo would likely be taken by
another woman I can't speak to the
casting procedures of every director in
Vegas but esterhaus seems to treat it
like the worst person is the common
element this movie is about the
exploitation of women in professional
spaces and we will twist the plot's arm
to make it happen God damn it you can
tell that Esther Haas was at the very
least thinking of the themes he was
trying to present here because even
after her tantrum Nomi gets the part and
on her first performance she opts to
apply ice to her nipples herself
signifying that she's being corrupted by
the drive to compete in this atmosphere
not that someone passed the third row
would be able to see how hard her
nipples are but you know symbolism the
sexual themes themselves are
a lot and common celebrations of
Showgirls Focus around several famous
sex scenes where Elizabeth Berkeley
demonstrates her core strength the sex
is quick wild and demonstrates a
Fantastical ease at which women can
reach convulsing orgasm while riding a
man's abdomen for those who have seen
Basic Instinct one may say that this is
just how Paul verhoven thinks sex
happens however the sex and Basic
Instincts served a methodical purpose
sex in the opening scene features a
woman rhythmically arriving a soon to be
ice-picked man every subsequent instance
of sex in the movie going forward
becomes a little bit more unhinged in
the final sequence Catherine tremel is
rigid robotic and not at all sexy my
take on this is that it's meant to be
read that she loses a bit of her
Humanity as we get to the core of who
she really is the sex and showgirls
at least doesn't seem to be as nuanced
it's kind of just wacky definitely worth
a watch content warning of course
because there is an completely out of
nowhere sexual assault which I would say
even provided an artistic reading of
show Girls shouldn't be there actress
Gina Rivera did not need to be put
through that but if the movie is this
much of a train wreck
why would I ever assume that there was
anything more to it
[Music]
foreign
the first real indication I noticed of
Showgirls demonstrating that it knows
what it's doing came towards the end of
the second act rising star Naomi Malone
has just sabotaged the show's star
Crystal Connors and taken her role as
the star of this world-renowned show
goddess while being celebrated by the
Press Nomi poses beside the power
players of the casino
chest bear
this is an almost identical Recreation
of an earlier scene with Crystal Connors
the primary difference aside from know
me being in her Shadow is that Crystal
conceals herself in a massive fur coach
the connections between the two scenes
function on multiple levels having moved
up from her Vegas Origins as a dancer in
a strip club Nomi longs to be part of
The Prestige of proper performance
dancing Crystal spends the entire movie
trying to convince her that at their
core
there really isn't any difference
between topless dancing at this casino
and topless dancing at the Cheetah club
Nomi resents Crystal for these little
reminders and fully chooses to believe
that she has left behind her old
salacious life for greener pastures
Crystal cynically entertains no
Illusions know me by contrast is open
and exposed to the glittering fantasy of
Las Vegas she is so enchanted by the
lights and the glamor that she is
vulnerable to the darker reality of the
industry even as Crystal does what she
can to disenchant Nomi to the underbelly
of it so now that we have this one very
visceral instance of symbolism
what do we do with it we can either
discount it as an accident or a
coincidence or we can examine valhoven's
film library and give him the benefit of
the doubt if this one instance holds
heavy symbology
what else in the movie is symbolic if we
examine Crystal as a proper literary
foil to know me rather than just a Trope
there's a bit of a rabbit hole that we
can go down Crystal urges Nomi to
understand that there are more
similarities between them than
differences Crystal still Likens herself
to a kind of sex worker but Nomi does
not find this similarity flattering what
seems to be the story's apparent villain
trying to get a rise out of the
protagonist is actually an indication
that Crystal sees right through her the
only difference between them it seems is
that Crystal is honest about her former
identity whereas Nomi keeps paulianne
Costello hidden from everyone when Nomi
does get a role in the chorus she seems
to feel like she's moved up in the world
and no longer has to exploit herself for
survival this is of course not the case
I mean really the script doesn't handle
this with a whole lot of subtlety
hard sells subtext the girls it seems
are regularly brought in to entertain
potential businessmen to facilitate
Partnerships with the casino meanwhile
at the cheetah there are very clear very
specific rules about interactions with
John's 50 books a pop you take them in
the back touch and go they touch they go
you can touch them they cannot touch you
there are no such rules at the Stardust
the girls are exploited and pitted
against each other they are shopped
around for sex and they use sex to
advance their positions there's even an
argument to be made that claims that the
cheetah is a safer more wholesome
atmosphere than the Stardust which may
not be an approximation to reality but
it fuels the point the film is trying to
make it also helps that as Nomi enters
the chorus of goddess there are numerous
ways that the dancers are subtextually
dehumanized through a number of
comparisons to animals primarily there's
I still love doggie Chow coupled with
the addition of a set of chimpanzees
the administration considers managing
the girls to be the same as managing The
Chimps what they say or want doesn't
really matter so long as they dance
even the show within the show goddess
mirrors the film itself while we never
see the show start to finish nor do we
even see all of its numbers the audience
has evidence of four maybe five sets we
know the introduction is the volcano
setting iconic and we know that the
finale ends with Crystal being lifted
from the stage
we see the industrial setting where Nomi
pushes Crystal down a flight of stairs
and based on costume changes backstage
we know that after the opening number we
go into a beat address sequence that
thanks to a boat show we can link to one
of the most played songs in the movie
between the beaded dress and the
industrial set there may be another
fifth number for which we hear the music
in the audition choreography but not for
sure the assumed plot of goddess in
sequence opens with men and women in
chaos and conflict the goddess's arrival
ushers in an era of passion and
sensuality as the archetype of sexuality
and Womanhood in stark contrast to Our
abrahamic Roots we can't say what the
next two numbers are about but when we
next pick up with the industrial scene
women and The Feminine archetype of the
Goddess are held prisoner and exploited
by the men on stage in turn the women
are in conflict with each other we move
into the presumably final sequence of
the show where there is once again unity
in order and the goddess transcends the
world in the same way that Nomi Malone
transcends Las Vegas when she decides
that the casino industry is a bit too
skeezy for her granted the play within a
play a literary device is crude but
serviceable it indicates that those
creating this film are thinking about
their own content
[Music]
be fair some of this may be to Esther
haas's credit it seems he had clear
intent but just got kind of very mixed
up in all of the pesky minutia of the
you know being a human being thing I've
heard rumors that he had a clause in his
contract that no changes to the script
could be made after his final draft
which is never the case in Hollywood the
director almost always rewrites a script
or has it Rewritten to match their own
style however estherhas and verhoven
were friends so there may have been a
significant amount of input that
verhoven had in its development without
asking verhoven I can't really know for
certain but provided that there is some
very deliberate methodology incorporated
into the visuals of this film
what happens if we give it the benefit
of the doubt and say that this was all
deliberate at the same time if we take
into consideration what expectations
were coming down from Studio heads at
MGM what do we get we get a movie that
does exactly what the studio wanted it
to
everything not because the filmmakers
didn't know how to restrain themselves
but because they were deliberately
trying to conform to the level of
ridiculousness that this film was
expected to be it's like that episode
from The Simpsons when Homer designs his
own car each little part is kind of a
cool idea on its own but assemble
everything together and if you just get
a monstrosity because the point of
Showgirls isn't about the corruptive
power of Fame it's not about the sexual
exploitation of women in the
entertainment industry the point of show
Girls
is to point out that this movie is a
monstrosity because all of these things
in Showgirls are things that in other
movies are celebrated just like know me
the audience is suspended into believing
that these kinds of Underdog Fame
narratives are possible
how many girls in America set out to Las
Vegas hoping to be seen by the right
person
how many of them never get out of the
cheetah Showgirls is holding a mirror up
in front of that expectation it's as
ridiculous as these sex scenes just like
women having orgasms in behoven films
the cell is the dream the Khan is
believing that it could really happen
that way Showgirls is like its content
it only really works if we live in a
fantasy world where rules don't matter
the dancing the glamor even Nomi's
insane wild sex moves they all benefit a
fantasy
of what it could be like people praising
Nomi for her incredible dancing skills a
fantasy a stripper reaching climax while
giving a lap dance a fantasy the sexual
fantasies seemed to fit a masculine
perspective the fame and fortune
fantasies seem to speak to the dreams
and Ambitions of young women
the whole thing suggests that Vegas or
the idea of Vegas is
a fantasy all while the film makes a
scathing criticism of Las Vegas itself
for all that Nomi holds up Vegas
entertainment has the Pinnacle of
prestige and dance valhoven takes every
opportunity to Lampoon Las Vegas itself
from the comedic acts of the drag-esque
performances at the cheetah to Nomi's
Premier performance as goddess being
heralded by a singing man in a toga at
the famous Caesar's Palace even
something as nonsensical as Nomi's
mispronunciation of Versace as Versace
while this textually shows the audience
that even if Nomi dresses herself up
that she doesn't actually have any class
if we take into consideration that this
is a movie made by Europeans it says
something else all these high-rolling
Americans making fun of Nomi for
pronouncing Versace wrong seem to be
clueless that this Italian surname is
pronounced Versace they are mocking her
for saying it wrong and correcting her
with a different mispronunciation for
all the Vegas props itself up as a high
society
just like Nomi slipping on a dress she
bought with a 500 lap dance
Vegas doesn't have a lick of class
itself
there's a tacky greasy cringy film over
everything in this town in the movie
fake pyramids fake breasts fake values
this world that know me prizes so
desperately is the equivalent of a
cardboard cutout of success and
validation
even the down to earth artist dancer who
promotes real values is fake
the only thing that's real is fakeness
something that Crystal is nonchalantly
trying to communicate
the film lies to your face when its
characters remark that know me is a good
dancer
the film lies to you when it tells you
that female orgasms can happen
instantaneously and the film seems to be
pointing out that any other time you see
this stuff in any other movie it's just
as much of a lie
thank you
[Music]
foreign
for Showgirls is accomplishing exactly
what I would argue the filmmakers want
to communicate maybe there was once an
intention to make this an earnestly good
movie and the pieces are all there maybe
dial back the clown car of a script to
focus on the beats that support the
underlying themes without obfuscating
them my deepest reading of Showgirls is
that it functions as a warning verhoven
longed to validate the NC-17 rating
because of the way the American NC-17
rating was widely applied to European
films that were otherwise celebrated and
popular
the open displays of sexual themes in
cinema was and remains fairly common in
Europe verhoven expressed frustration
that when these films went for an
American release
they would be stamped with an NC-17
rating and they would tank at the box
office an NC-17 is
like taking a hit out on a movie in
America this is speculation on my part
but when verhoven finally had a studio
stamp of approval to make an NC-17
Hollywood feature his tune may have
changed perhaps validating the NC-17
rating
would have just resulted in studio heads
throwing tits in a movie and not for any
artistic reason just for shock factor
and instead of deliberately sabotaging
the project verhoven crafted the kind of
film that would eventually be the
outcome of letting Hollywood Executives
notoriously know very little about
Cinema or film Theory play with tits
perhaps you realize that America
wouldn't adopt more European values
instead would be more like
Las Vegas Nomi's Exodus from Nevada on
the road to Los Angeles was heralding a
warning to Hollywood
that upon the conditional validation of
NC-17 sexuality one could expect many
movies to become more like Showgirls
instead of say angli's lust caution
and that perhaps Americans simply do not
have the same values when it comes to
sex or sexuality as Europeans when as a
society did we become so confused about
the difference between sex acts and
sexuality
to the point where even an object which
is tangentially related to a symbol of
sexuality is seen more or less as the
same as promiscuity itself
during the 2016 presidential run husband
of presidential candidate Pete butterjas
chaston canceled a scheduled campaign
stop in a gay bar because there was a
poll on the stage a poll which well used
for many things one of which being the
traditional dance form in India and
China can be used for sexual titillation
many in the queer community at large saw
this as a slap in the face from a man
whose claim to fame was the first openly
gay man to run for president
and an ill Omen of how he would observe
queer issues from the Oval Office but
the question to me wasn't why Buddha
judge specifically would reject an
instance of queer sexuality
but why is it expected of American
political representatives to detest
sexuality
in general
the more we reject instances of sex and
sexuality the more we treat sex as this
naughty taboo thing where the slightest
mention of human sexuality something
that is pivotally fundamental to the
species is risque but we can't ever not
think about sex as a society because
looming over this sexist dirty mindset
is the fact that we are all aware that
every person in this Society exists as a
result of sex
the movie The Showgirls was meant to be
can never exist in Hollywood
because the second you want to develop
an artistic project about sex sex is all
it's ever going to be about
sex becomes a gimmick sex becomes a
spectacle a selling point sex becomes a
statement
a shock an exploitation
but one thing that sex can never be seen
as is normal I can see a very
problematic state of human existence
arising from a mindset where the action
dependent on our survival is seen as
abnormal because if sex itself is
abnormal sexuality and any opinion you
may have about sex is abnormal too even
an unwillingness to have sex is seen as
abnormal because people believe that in
spite of society's condemnation of it
that you still should want to do it
anyway and it's weird if you don't it's
a very sad state of America when a film
about the exploitation of sex is decried
as one of the worst movies of all time
whereas when the same director made
RoboCop featuring gratuitous violence
and the plot of which is just about as
nonsensical it is held up as an action
masterpiece
violence is okay sex is not we need to
begin reevaluating our widespread
stigmatization of sex because even as
the NC-17 rating remains a death knell
for Hollywood movies some of the most
significant television series that have
been made between now and the release of
Showgirls would have gotten that rating
without hesitation Game of Thrones sex
in the city Queer as Folk we clearly are
comfortable enough with sex to be open
to its depiction in the comfort of our
own homes
but we still like to pretend like it
doesn't exist when we're anywhere else
a world where Showgirls exists is a
world where America can find dignity and
sex
a culture that is embarrassed by sex
cannot take it seriously
because nobody is going to know how to
bring it up in polite Society think
about that the next time you shame
someone for posting a thirst trap on
Instagram
or get embarrassed because your friends
started in only fans we're never going
to be able to use art to celebrate sex
if we use sex to shame other people so
if you find yourself in the habit of
shaming others for their sexual
practices or even micromanaging what
ought to qualify as normal sex
take a moment to stop and remind
yourself
that it's you
it's your fault
it's your fault that we have showgirls
thank you
[Music]
[Applause]
thank you
[Music]